
*1. Program Modules in Java


~ INTRO TO METHODS ~
Java API Methods: Java programs allows the user to create custom methods and classes that can be written using predefined methods like 
".equalsIgnoreCase(“...“)" and classes like an ArrayList provided by the API (Java Application Programming Interface).

Similar classes are usually grouped into packages to be easily managed and reused for importing in programs.


~ PURPOSE OF METHODS ~
Methods help to organize a program by separating its task to individual units that are capable of performing mini-class level tasks. 
This is great for dividing and conquering a large task into smaller tasks to facilitate the readability and debugging process of the program. 
This also enhances software reusability as the methods can be used as fundamental tools to establish new, larger programs.

Analogy: The teacher (caller) asks his/her student (called method) to complete a task and communicate back (using the return keyword). 
The teacher is not aware of how the student would do their assignment since the student can also call other methods to help them perform their tasks.

~ WHAT ARE OBJECTS? ~
Objects refers to a basic unit of Object-Oriented Programming that represents real-life entities. 
Objects are instances of a class that are created to use the methods and attributions of a class. 
For example, “basketballPlayerObject” is an object that represents generic basketball players.


What is an Instance?
An instance is a created variable of a class. However, they are not as generic as objects. 
For example, an instance can be “Lebron James”, and it falls under the object category “basketballPlayerObject”.

#P#:images/methodHierachy.png

*2. static Methods, Class Math, & static Fields


~ STATIC METHODS ~
A static method (or a class method) is where the method that performs a task is not dependent on any object contents; 
The method belongs to the class itself since it is typically declared entirely by using the class name instead. 
To sum up, all static methods can be called without creating a class object. 
Placement: To acknowledge a method as 'static', place the keyword static before the return type in order to declare method static.
		   For example, public static void methodName() 


~ CLASS MATH AND FIELDS ~
A field is a variable of any type declared within the class that represents a value. 
A field that corresponds to an attribute is recognized as an instance variable where each instance (object) of the class contains a 
distinct instance of the same variable in memory. 

Example:
public class Person { 
String name;  // This is a field (instance variable) representing an attribute.
int age;  // Another field representing an attribute. 
}

Predefined Math fields in Java API includes Math.PI (3.141592653589793) and Math.E (2.718281828459045). 
They are a static final double field in the Math class. Declaring the field public allows the fields to be used in own classes. 
A field declared with keyword final makes that variable constant - the value can no longer be modified after initialization (ex. final score = 3). 
PI and E are final constants because their values will always remain the same. 


~ STATIC FIELDS ~ 
Static fields, also known as class variables, are fields that are shared among the objects of a particular class. 
Each object of that class does not need to have a separate instance of the field. 
In other words, the static field belongs only to the class and is accessible throughout the class.

#P#:images/staticFieldDiagram.png
In this picture, this showcases the objects that share a copy of the same field. 
In all, both the class variables and instance variables represent the fields of a class. 
The main method (public static void main(String[] args)) is static to avoid creating instances of the main class.
  


*3. Declaring Methods with Multiple Parameters


~ PARAMETERS & ARGUMENTS ~
Multiple method parameters - which are a list of variables within the parenthesis upon method declaration - are to be used as a comma-separated list. 
Parameters are variables that are defined in parenthesis after a method declaration allocated after the method name. 
There must be one argument for every parameter called in the method declaration.  

Arguments are values given to the parameters:
They refer to the value passed on to a function when the function is called, and the value passed contains sufficient amount of information required 
to be processed by the program. 
Variables, expressions, or constants are also used in method arguments.

In other words, the parameters are the receivers while the arguments are the providers.


~ STRING CONCATENATION ~
To concatenate strings, meaning to add multiple string together, add the "+" operator. 
Concatenating a string with a boolean would turn the boolean into strings “true” or “false”.

Example:
boolean isActive = true;
String trafficLight = "It is green light: " + isActive;  // Combining the boolean with String


~ OTHER PRIMITIVE TYPES TO STRING ~
Every primitive type has a String representation. For example, the int 5 can be modified to String “5”.


~ toString METHOD ~
All Java classes contain a toString method that outputs a String representation of the object.
When overridden, the reader of the code can determine the topic clearly since the string conversion facilitates the understanding process of 
the code’s topic.

Example of toString Code and argument/parameter Codes:
#P#:images/toStringExample.png
#P#:images/argumentExample.png
#P#:images/parameterExample.png


 
*4. Notes on Declaring and Using Methods


~ HOW TO CALL A METHOD? ~
Calling Methods Within Same Class While Omitting Object Reference: Use only the method name individually to call on another method. 
For example, in method1, type “method2();” to summon the contents from that method.

Calling Methods Within Same Class With Object Reference: Use a variable that has reference to the object. 
Place a dot after that and beyond the dot, add the method name. For example, “myCat” is a reference variable to an actual object called “Cat”. 
That object is an instance of the “Cat” class, where the name “Lucky” has been created. 
There is another method called “meow”, where it collects the name of the “Cat”, which is “Lucky”, and outputs “Lucky meows”. 
The structure of the calling method is: “myCat.meow();”

Calling Static Methods: Use the class name, place a dot, and put the name of the static method afterwards. 


~ CALLING STATIC AND NON-STATIC METHODS ~ 
Non-Static Methods: Can summon any method of the same class by calling its direct method name and can modify and control any of the class’s fields 
directly.

Static Methods: Can only call other static methods from the same class and can only control any of the static fields of the same class directly.


~ HOW TO RETURN A VALUE FROM A METHOD? ~
How to end a method without returning a value?
1. Add a method-ending right curly brace to end the program flow within the method.
2. Type “return;” to immediately terminate the method after execution has completed.

How to end a method and return a value?
Type “return expression;”. The “expression” is assessed first and the resulting value will be returned to their caller. 
The value can be any primitive type or an instance of an object, depending on the topic of the class and its situation. 
Be sure to change void into int or any primitive type corresponding to the primitive type of the value returned from the method.



*5 - Method-Call Stack


~ STACK ~
A stack is analogous to a dish pile. A dish is placed on the pile at the top of the stack (referred to as pushing an item onto the stack). 
A dish is removed from the top of the pile (referred to as popping an item off from its stack). 
In other words, it is a data structure in which the first element is removed and the last element is added. 
This is also referred to as LIFO (last in first out).


~ STACK IN THE WORKS ~
When a program summons a method, the method must know how to return to the caller. 
The return address of the calling method is imported onto a program execution stack to organize the program execution process. 
As a result, the last-in, first-out order will be orchestrated when the program calls on multiple methods to ensure successive return addresses.


~ STACK OVERFLOW ~
Everytime a method is called, an activation record is created. 
Stack overflow occurs when the number of method calls outweigh the number of activation records stored on the program execution stack, 
where active subroutines of the program are stored.



*6 - Java API Packages
In the Java API, Java has many predefined classes contained in related class categories called packages. 
For example, java.util is a package that contains many related classes such as Hashmaps, Arraylists, Scanners, etc. 
In addition, java.io has classes that is responsible for file handling including Printwriter and File. 


Overview of Java Packages and API Documentation:
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/

Here are images of different Java predefined classes:
#P#:images/classExamples.png



*7 - Random-Number Generation


~ JAVA.UTIL CLASS RANDOM ~ 
This is a static method random located in class Math. So, this can be called using “Math.random()”. 
Objects of the class Random does not only produce int values; It can also produce boolean, double, long, bytes, and even Gaussian values! 

The class Random creates pseudorandom numbers, which is a complex mathematical calculation that provides value sequences. 
Random uses the present time of the day to produce a default seed for the random-number generator. This is explained clearly the picture in the end
of the section.
  
With accordance to the picture, the process starts with the seed. If no seed is provided, the current time of the day would be utilized. 
After, the seed is initialized to create a first state for the random number generator. 
After each random number is created, the generator updates the state to calculate the next random number, ensuring that the next random number 
corresponds to the previous random number. The repeating process is a sign of a pseudorandom sequence.


~ CALLING DOUBLE MATH.RANDOM ~
The “Math.random()” has a bandwidth to create only double values through the scope 0.0 <= x <= 1.0. 
If you want a number from 0.0 to 6.0, simply type “Math.Random() * 6;”.


~ CALLING INTEGER MATH.RANDOM ~
When calling an int value Math.Random using nextInt, the int argument will return a value from 0 to the number before the argument’s value. 
For example, when calling a random integer between 0-16, you must typecast “Math.Random()” using “int”. 
In addition, you should use “17” as the end number instead of “16”. 
The final call result to generate random integer numbers from 0-16 is “(int) (Math.Random() * 17);”


~ SCALING FACTOR ~
For example, if a user is rolling a six-sided die, the number “6” is the scaling factor since it symbolizes the numbers that nextInt would create: 0-5. 
However, a six-sided die has sides 1-6, not 0-5. 
To fix this, add a shifting value of “1” to our previous result so that the program knows the first value of the anticipated output of random numbers. 

Example:
Random randomNumbers = new Random();  // creating an object of class Random
face = 1 + randomNumbers.nextInt(6);  // will produce numbers 1-6

#P#:images/randomNumberIllustration.png



*8 - Introducing Enumerations


Enumeration are constants that can be global or non-globalized. 
It can declare a set of contents represented by identifiers (name given to methods, packages, classes, etc) that are related. 
Variables of the enumeration can only be assigned to the constants listed in the enumeration. 



*9 - Scope of Declarations


~ SCOPING ~
The scope of a field or a method applies to the entire scope of the class.
The scope of a local variable is from the point of their declaration to the end of the method or parenthesis.
The scope of a method declaration parameter is the end of the method in which the parameter receives the argument's value.
The scope of a local variable declared in a for statement occurs within the block of the for loop.